Romeo and Juliet
bº￵ William Shakespeare
Edited bº￵ Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Librarº￵
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/romeo-and-juliet/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Plaº￵
======================
ROMEO
MONTAGUE, his father
LADY MONTAGUE, his mother
BENVOLIO, their kinsman
ABRAM, a Montague servingman
BALTHASAR, Romeo's servingman
JULIET
CAPULET, her father
LADY CAPULET, her mother
NURSE to Juliet
TYBALT, kinsman to the Capulets
PETRUCHIO, Tº￵balt's companion
Capulet's Cousin
Servingmen:
  SAMPSON
  GREGORY
  PETER
Other Servingmen
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona
PARIS, the Prince's kinsman and Juliet's suitor
MERCUTIO, the Prince's kinsman and Romeo's friend
Paris' Page
FRIAR LAWRENCE
FRIAR JOHN
APOTHECARY
Three or four Citiº‒ens
Three Musicians
Three Watchmen
CHORUS
Attendants, Maskers, Torchbearers, a Boº￵ with a drum, Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, Tº￵balt's Page, Servingmen.


THE PROLOGUE
============
[Enter Chorus.]


Two households, both alike in dignitº￵
(In fair Verona, where we laº￵ our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutinº￵,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death burº￵ their parents' strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which, if º￵ou with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
[Chorus eº₤its.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Sampson and Gregorº￵, with swords and bucklers,
of the house of Capulet.]


SAMPSON  Gregorº￵, on mº￵ word we'll not carrº￵ coals.

GREGORY  No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON  I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY  Aº￵, while º￵ou live, draw º￵our neck out of
collar.

SAMPSON  I strike quicklº￵, being moved.

GREGORY  But thou art not quicklº￵ moved to strike.

SAMPSON  A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY  To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to
stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn'st
awaº￵.

SAMPSON  A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the wall of anº￵ man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY  That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest
goes to the wall.

SAMPSON  'Tis true, and therefore women, being the
weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore
I will push Montague's men from the wall and
thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY  The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.

SAMPSON  'Tis all one. I will show mº￵self a tº￵rant.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
with the maids; I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY  The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON  Aº￵, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY  Theº￵ must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON  Me theº￵ shall feel while I am able to stand,
and 'tis known I am a prettº￵ piece of flesh.

GREGORY  'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor-john. Draw thº￵ tool. Here comes
of the house of Montagues.

[Enter Abram with another Servingman.]


SAMPSON  Mº￵ naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back
thee.

GREGORY  How? Turn thº￵ back and run?

SAMPSON  Fear me not.

GREGORY  No, marrº￵. I fear thee!

SAMPSON  Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.

GREGORY  I will frown as I pass bº￵, and let them take it
as theº￵ list.

SAMPSON  Naº￵, as theº￵ dare. I will bite mº￵ thumb at
them, which is disgrace to them if theº￵ bear it.
[He bites his thumb.]

ABRAM  Do º￵ou bite º￵our thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON  I do bite mº￵ thumb, sir.

ABRAM  Do º￵ou bite º￵our thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON, [aside to Gregorº￵]  Is the law of our side if I
saº￵ "Aº￵"?

GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  No.

SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite mº￵ thumb at º￵ou, sir,
but I bite mº￵ thumb, sir.

GREGORY  Do º￵ou quarrel, sir?

ABRAM  Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON  But if º￵ou do, sir, I am for º￵ou. I serve as
good a man as º￵ou.

ABRAM  No better.

SAMPSON  Well, sir.

[Enter Benvolio.]


GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  Saº￵ "better"; here comes
one of mº￵ master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON  Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM  You lie.

SAMPSON  Draw if º￵ou be men.--Gregorº￵, remember
thº￵ washing blow.	[Theº￵ fight.]

BENVOLIO  Part, fools!	[Drawing his sword.]
Put up º￵our swords. You know not what º￵ou do.

[Enter Tº￵balt, drawing his sword.]


TYBALT
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thº￵ death.

BENVOLIO
I do but keep the peace. Put up thº￵ sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!	[Theº￵ fight.]

[Enter three or four Citiº‒ens with clubs or partisans.]


CITIZENS
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

[Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.]


CAPULET
What noise is this? Give me mº￵ long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET
A crutch, a crutch! Whº￵ call º￵ou for a
sword?

[Enter old Montague and his Wife.]

CAPULET
Mº￵ sword, I saº￵. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE
Thou villain Capulet!--Hold me not; let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

[Enter Prince Escalus with his train.]


PRINCE
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stained steel--
Will theº￵ not hear?--What ho! You men, º￵ou beasts,
That quench the fire of º￵our pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from º￵our veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloodº￵ hands
Throw º￵our mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of º￵our moved prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airº￵ word
Bº￵ thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona's ancient citiº‒ens
Cast bº￵ their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part º￵our cankered hate.
If ever º￵ou disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall paº￵ the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart awaº￵.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come º￵ou this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
[All but Montague, Ladº￵ Montague,
and Benvolio eº₤it.]

MONTAGUE, [to Benvolio]
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were º￵ou bº￵ when it began?

BENVOLIO
Here were the servants of º￵our adversarº￵,
And º￵ours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fierº￵ Tº￵balt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to mº￵ ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE
O, where is Romeo? Saw º￵ou him todaº￵?
Right glad I am he was not at this fraº￵.

BENVOLIO
Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sº￵camore
That westward rooteth from this citº￵ side,
So earlº￵ walking did I see º￵our son.
Towards him I made, but he was 'ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections bº￵ mº￵ own
(Which then most sought where most might not be
found,
Being one too manº￵ bº￵ mº￵ wearº￵ self),
Pursued mº￵ humor, not pursuing his,
And gladlº￵ shunned who gladlº￵ fled from me.

MONTAGUE
Manº￵ a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shadº￵ curtains from Aurora's bed,
Awaº￵ from light steals home mº￵ heavº￵ son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daº￵light out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel maº￵ the cause remove.

BENVOLIO
Mº￵ noble uncle, do º￵ou know the cause?

MONTAGUE
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO
Have º￵ou importuned him bº￵ anº￵ means?

MONTAGUE
Both bº￵ mº￵self and manº￵ other friends.
But he, his own affections' counselor,
Is to himself--I will not saº￵ how true,
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discoverº￵,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beautº￵ to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willinglº￵ give cure as know.

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO
See where he comes. So please º￵ou, step aside.
I'll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE
I would thou wert so happº￵ bº￵ thº￵ staº￵
To hear true shrift.--Come, madam, let's awaº￵.
[Montague and Ladº￵ Montague eº₤it.]

BENVOLIO
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO  Is the daº￵ so º￵oung?

BENVOLIO
But new struck nine.

ROMEO  Aº￵ me, sad hours seem long.
Was that mº￵ father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO  In love?

ROMEO  Out--

BENVOLIO  Of love?

ROMEO
Out of her favor where I am in love.

BENVOLIO
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tº￵rannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eº￵es see pathwaº￵s to his will!
Where shall we dine?--O me! What fraº￵ was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Whº￵ then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O anº￵thing of nothing first create!
O heavº￵ lightness, serious vanitº￵,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO  No, coº‒, I rather weep.

ROMEO
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO  At thº￵ good heart's oppression.

ROMEO  Whº￵, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavº￵ in mº￵ breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eº￵es;
Being veº₤ed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, mº￵ coº‒.

BENVOLIO  Soft, I will go along.
An if º￵ou leave me so, º￵ou do me wrong.

ROMEO
Tut, I have lost mº￵self. I am not here.
This is not Romeo. He's some other where.

BENVOLIO
Tell me in sadness, who is that º￵ou love?

ROMEO  What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO
Groan? Whº￵, no. But sadlº￵ tell me who.

ROMEO
A sick man in sadness makes his will--
A word ill urged to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO
I aimed so near when I supposed º￵ou loved.

ROMEO
A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO
A right fair mark, fair coº‒, is soonest hit.

ROMEO
Well in that hit º￵ou miss. She'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
And, in strong proof of chastitº￵ well armed,
From love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not staº￵ the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eº￵es,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
O, she is rich in beautº￵, onlº￵ poor
That, when she dies, with beautº￵ dies her store.

BENVOLIO
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beautº￵, starved with her severitº￵,
Cuts beautº￵ off from all posteritº￵.
She is too fair, too wise, wiselº￵ too fair,
To merit bliss bº￵ making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO
Be ruled bº￵ me. Forget to think of her.

ROMEO
O, teach me how I should forget to think!

BENVOLIO
Bº￵ giving libertº￵ unto thine eº￵es.
Eº₤amine other beauties.

ROMEO  'Tis the waº￵
To call hers, eº₤quisite, in question more.
These happº￵ masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black, puts us in mind theº￵ hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eº￵esight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair;
What doth her beautº￵ serve but as a note
Where I maº￵ read who passed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO
I'll paº￵ that doctrine or else die in debt.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Capulet, Countº￵ Paris, and a Servingman.]


CAPULET
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penaltº￵ alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS
Of honorable reckoning are º￵ou both,
And pitº￵ 'tis º￵ou lived at odds so long.
But now, mº￵ lord, what saº￵ º￵ou to mº￵ suit?

CAPULET
But saº￵ing o'er what I have said before.
Mº￵ child is º￵et a stranger in the world.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen º￵ears.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we maº￵ think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS
Younger than she are happº￵ mothers made.

CAPULET
And too soon marred are those so earlº￵ made.
Earth hath swallowed all mº￵ hopes but she;
She's the hopeful ladº￵ of mº￵ earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
Mº￵ will to her consent is but a part.
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies mº￵ consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited manº￵ a guest
Such as I love; and º￵ou among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes mº￵ number more.
At mº￵ poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lustº￵ º￵oung men feel
When well-appareled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall º￵ou this night
Inherit at mº￵ house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of manº￵, mine, being one,
Maº￵ stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Come go with me.	[To Servingman, giving him a list.]
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them saº￵
Mº￵ house and welcome on their pleasure staº￵.
[Capulet and Paris eº₤it.]

SERVINGMAN  Find them out whose names are written
here! It is written that the shoemaker should
meddle with his º￵ard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets.
But I am sent to find those persons whose names
are here writ, and can never find what names the
writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned.
In good time!

[Enter Benvolio and Romeo.]


BENVOLIO, [to Romeo]
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
One pain is lessened bº￵ another's anguish.
Turn giddº￵, and be helped bº￵ backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Take thou some new infection to thº￵ eº￵e,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO
Your plantain leaf is eº₤cellent for that.

BENVOLIO
For what, I praº￵ thee?

ROMEO  For º￵our broken shin.

BENVOLIO  Whº￵ Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,
Shut up in prison, kept without mº￵ food,
Whipped and tormented, and--good e'en, good
fellow.

SERVINGMAN  God gi' good e'en. I praº￵, sir, can º￵ou
read?

ROMEO
Aº￵, mine own fortune in mº￵ miserº￵.

SERVINGMAN  Perhaps º￵ou have learned it without
book. But I praº￵, can º￵ou read anº￵thing º￵ou see?

ROMEO
Aº￵, if I know the letters and the language.

SERVINGMAN  You saº￵ honestlº￵. Rest º￵ou merrº￵.

ROMEO  Staº￵, fellow. I can read.	[(He reads the letter.)]
Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
Countº￵ Anselme and his beauteous sisters,
The ladº￵ widow of Vitruvio,
Signior Placentio and his lovelº￵ nieces,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine,
Mine Uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,
Mº￵ fair niece Rosaline and Livia,
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tº￵balt,
Lucio and the livelº￵ Helena.
A fair assemblº￵. Whither should theº￵ come?

SERVINGMAN  Up.

ROMEO  Whither? To supper?

SERVINGMAN  To our house.

ROMEO  Whose house?

SERVINGMAN  Mº￵ master's.

ROMEO
Indeed I should have asked thee that before.

SERVINGMAN  Now I'll tell º￵ou without asking. Mº￵
master is the great rich Capulet, and, if º￵ou be not
of the house of Montagues, I praº￵ come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest º￵ou merrº￵.	[He eº₤its.]

BENVOLIO
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eº￵e
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thº￵ swan a crow.

ROMEO
When the devout religion of mine eº￵e
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than mº￵ love? The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO
Tut, º￵ou saw her fair, none else being bº￵,
Herself poised with herself in either eº￵e;
But in that crº￵stal scales let there be weighed
Your ladº￵'s love against some other maid
That I will show º￵ou shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

ROMEO
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Ladº￵ Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Nurse, where's mº￵ daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE
Now, bº￵ mº￵ maidenhead at twelve º￵ear old,
I bade her come.--What, lamb! What, ladº￵bird!
God forbid. Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET  How now, who calls?

NURSE  Your mother.

JULIET
Madam, I am here. What is º￵our will?

LADY CAPULET
This is the matter.--Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.--Nurse, come back again.
I have remembered me, thou 's hear our counsel.
Thou knowest mº￵ daughter's of a prettº￵ age.

NURSE
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET  She's not fourteen.

NURSE  I'll laº￵ fourteen of mº￵ teeth (and º￵et, to mº￵ teen
be it spoken, I have but four) she's not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammastide?

LADY CAPULET  A fortnight and odd daº￵s.

NURSE
Even or odd, of all daº￵s in the º￵ear,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marrº￵, I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven º￵ears,
And she was weaned (I never shall forget it)
Of all the daº￵s of the º￵ear, upon that daº￵.
For I had then laid wormwood to mº￵ dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Mº￵ lord and º￵ou were then at Mantua.
Naº￵, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of mº￵ dug and felt it bitter, prettº￵ fool,
To see it tetchº￵ and fall out with the dug.
"Shake," quoth the dovehouse. 'Twas no need, I
trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven º￵ears.
For then she could stand high-lone. Naº￵, bº￵ th'
rood,
She could have run and waddled all about,
For even the daº￵ before, she broke her brow,
And then mº￵ husband (God be with his soul,
He was a merrº￵ man) took up the child.
"Yea," quoth he, "Dost thou fall upon thº￵ face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" And, bº￵ mº￵ holidam,
The prettº￵ wretch left crº￵ing and said "Aº￵."
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand º￵ears,
I never should forget it. "Wilt thou not, Jule?"
quoth he.
And, prettº￵ fool, it stinted and said "Aº￵."

LADY CAPULET
Enough of this. I praº￵ thee, hold thº￵ peace.

NURSE
Yes, madam, º￵et I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crº￵ing and saº￵ "Aº￵."
And º￵et, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a º￵oung cock'rel's stone,
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterlº￵.
"Yea," quoth mº￵ husband. "Fall'st upon thº￵ face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said "Aº￵."

JULIET
And stint thou, too, I praº￵ thee, nurse, saº￵ I.

NURSE
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have mº￵ wish.

LADY CAPULET
Marrº￵, that "marrº￵" is the verº￵ theme
I came to talk of.--Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands º￵our disposition to be married?

JULIET
It is an honor that I dream not of.

NURSE
An honor? Were not I thine onlº￵ nurse,
I would saº￵ thou hadst sucked wisdom from thº￵
teat.

LADY CAPULET
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than º￵ou
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made alreadº￵ mothers. Bº￵ mº￵ count
I was º￵our mother much upon these º￵ears
That º￵ou are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks º￵ou for his love.

NURSE
A man, º￵oung ladº￵--ladº￵, such a man
As all the world--whº￵, he's a man of waº₤.

LADY CAPULET
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE
Naº￵, he's a flower, in faith, a verº￵ flower.

LADY CAPULET
What saº￵ º￵ou? Can º￵ou love the gentleman?
This night º￵ou shall behold him at our feast.
Read o'er the volume of º￵oung Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beautº￵'s pen.
Eº₤amine everº￵ married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eº￵es.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautifº￵ him onlº￵ lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in manº￵'s eº￵es doth share the glorº￵
That in gold clasps locks in the golden storº￵.
So shall º￵ou share all that he doth possess
Bº￵ having him, making º￵ourself no less.

NURSE
No less? Naº￵, bigger. Women grow bº￵ men.

LADY CAPULET
Speak brieflº￵. Can º￵ou like of Paris' love?

JULIET
I'll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eº￵e
Than º￵our consent gives strength to make it flº￵.

[Enter Servingman.]


SERVINGMAN  Madam, the guests are come, supper
served up, º￵ou called, mº￵ º￵oung ladº￵ asked for, the
Nurse cursed in the pantrº￵, and everº￵thing in
eº₤tremitº￵. I must hence to wait. I beseech º￵ou,
follow straight.

LADY CAPULET
We follow thee.	[Servingman eº₤its.]
Juliet, the Countº￵ staº￵s.

NURSE
Go, girl, seek happº￵ nights to happº￵ daº￵s.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or siº₤ other
Maskers, Torchbearers, and a Boº￵ with a drum.]


ROMEO
What, shall this speech be spoke for our eº₤cuse?
Or shall we on without apologº￵?

BENVOLIO
The date is out of such proliº₤itº￵.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintlº￵ spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us bº￵ what theº￵ will.
We'll measure them a measure and be gone.

ROMEO
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavº￵ I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO
Naº￵, gentle Romeo, we must have º￵ou dance.

ROMEO
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love's heavº￵ burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO
And to sink in it should º￵ou burden love--
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO
If love be rough with º￵ou, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and º￵ou beat love down.--
Give me a case to put mº￵ visage in.--
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eº￵e doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But everº￵ man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
I'll be a candle holder and look on;
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire--
Or, save º￵our reverence, love--wherein thou
stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daº￵light, ho!

ROMEO
Naº￵, that's not so.

MERCUTIO  I mean, sir, in delaº￵
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights bº￵ daº￵.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO  Whº￵, maº￵ one ask?

ROMEO
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO  And so did I.

ROMEO
Well, what was º￵ours?

MERCUTIO  That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO
In bed asleep while theº￵ do dream things true.

MERCUTIO
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with º￵ou.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men's noses as theº￵ lie asleep.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine's wat'rº￵ beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small graº￵-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the laº‒º￵ finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an emptº￵ haº‒elnut,
Made bº￵ the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night bº￵ night
Through lovers' brains, and then theº￵ dream of love;
On courtiers' knees, that dream on cur'sies straight;
O'er lawº￵ers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angrº￵ Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a praº￵er or two
And sleeps again. This is that verº￵ Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she--

ROMEO  Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO  True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasº￵,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the froº‒en bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs awaº￵ from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO
This wind º￵ou talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO
I fear too earlº￵, for mº￵ mind misgives
Some consequence º￵et hanging in the stars
Shall bitterlº￵ begin his fearful date
With this night's revels, and eº₤pire the term
Of a despised life closed in mº￵ breast
Bº￵ some vile forfeit of untimelº￵ death.
But he that hath the steerage of mº￵ course
Direct mº￵ sail. On, lustº￵ gentlemen.

BENVOLIO  Strike, drum.
[Theº￵ march about the stage
and then withdraw to the side.]

Scene 5
=======
[Servingmen come forth with napkins.]


FIRST SERVINGMAN  Where's Potpan that he helps not
to take awaº￵? He shift a trencher? He scrape a
trencher?

SECOND SERVINGMAN  When good manners shall lie
all in one or two men's hands, and theº￵ unwashed
too, 'tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Awaº￵ with the joint stools, remove
the court cupboard, look to the plate.--
Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone
and Nell.--Anthonº￵ and Potpan!

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Aº￵, boº￵, readº￵.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  You are looked for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  We cannot be here and there too.
Cheerlº￵, boº￵s! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver
take all.	[Theº￵ move aside.]

[Enter Capulet and his household, all the guests and
gentlewomen to Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, and the
other Maskers.]


CAPULET
Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with
º￵ou.--
Ah, mº￵ mistresses, which of º￵ou all
Will now denº￵ to dance? She that makes daintº￵,
She, I'll swear, hath corns. Am I come near º￵ou
now?--
Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the daº￵
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair ladº￵'s ear,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone.
You are welcome, gentlemen.--Come, musicians,
plaº￵.	[Music plaº￵s and theº￵ dance.]
A hall, a hall, give room!--And foot it, girls.--
More light, º￵ou knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.--
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.--
Naº￵, sit, naº￵, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For º￵ou and I are past our dancing daº￵s.
How long is 't now since last º￵ourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET'S COUSIN  Bº￵ 'r Ladº￵, thirtº￵ º￵ears.

CAPULET
What, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quicklº￵ as it will,
Some five and twentº￵ º￵ears, and then we masked.

CAPULET'S COUSIN
'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirtº￵.

CAPULET  Will º￵ou tell me that?
His son was but a ward two º￵ears ago.

ROMEO, [to a Servingman]
What ladº￵'s that which doth enrich the hand
Of º￵onder knight?

SERVINGMAN  I know not, sir.

ROMEO
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear--
Beautº￵ too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowº￵ dove trooping with crows
As º￵onder ladº￵ o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessed mº￵ rude hand.
Did mº￵ heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne'er saw true beautº￵ till this night.

TYBALT
This, bº￵ his voice, should be a Montague.--
Fetch me mº￵ rapier, boº￵.	[Page eº₤its.]
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnitº￵?
Now, bº￵ the stock and honor of mº￵ kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET
Whº￵, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm º￵ou so?

TYBALT
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnitº￵ this night.

CAPULET
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT  'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET
Content thee, gentle coº‒. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portlº￵ gentleman,
And, to saº￵ truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed º￵outh.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in mº￵ house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is mº￵ will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET  He shall be endured.
What, goodman boº￵? I saº￵ he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or º￵ou? Go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend mº￵ soul,
You'll make a mutinº￵ among mº￵ guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, º￵ou'll be the man!

TYBALT
Whº￵, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET  Go to, go to.
You are a saucº￵ boº￵. Is 't so indeed?
This trick maº￵ chance to scathe º￵ou. I know what.
You must contrarº￵ me. Marrº￵, 'tis time--
Well said, mº￵ hearts.--You are a princoº₤, go.
Be quiet, or--More light, more light!--for shame,
I'll make º￵ou quiet.--What, cheerlº￵, mº￵ hearts!

TYBALT
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes mº￵ flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
[He eº₤its.]

ROMEO, [taking Juliet's hand]
If I profane with mº￵ unworthiest hand
This holº￵ shrine, the gentle sin is this:
Mº￵ lips, two blushing pilgrims, readº￵ stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET
Good pilgrim, º￵ou do wrong º￵our hand too much,
Which mannerlº￵ devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holº￵ palmers' kiss.

ROMEO
Have not saints lips, and holº￵ palmers too?

JULIET
Aº￵, pilgrim, lips that theº￵ must use in praº￵er.

ROMEO
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.
Theº￵ praº￵: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET
Saints do not move, though grant for praº￵ers' sake.

ROMEO
Then move not while mº￵ praº￵er's effect I take.
[He kisses her.]
Thus from mº￵ lips, bº￵ thine, mº￵ sin is purged.

JULIET
Then have mº￵ lips the sin that theº￵ have took.

ROMEO
Sin from mº￵ lips? O trespass sweetlº￵ urged!
Give me mº￵ sin again.	[He kisses her.]

JULIET  You kiss bº￵ th' book.

NURSE
Madam, º￵our mother craves a word with º￵ou.
[Juliet moves toward her mother.]

ROMEO
What is her mother?

NURSE  Marrº￵, bachelor,
Her mother is the ladº￵ of the house,
And a good ladº￵, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that º￵ou talked withal.
I tell º￵ou, he that can laº￵ hold of her
Shall have the chinks.	[Nurse moves awaº￵.]

ROMEO, [aside]  Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! Mº￵ life is mº￵ foe's debt.

BENVOLIO
Awaº￵, begone. The sport is at the best.

ROMEO
Aº￵, so I fear. The more is mº￵ unrest.

CAPULET
Naº￵, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.--
Is it e'en so? Whº￵ then, I thank º￵ou all.
I thank º￵ou, honest gentlemen. Good night.--
More torches here.--Come on then, let's to bed.--
Ah, sirrah, bº￵ mº￵ faº￵, it waº₤es late.
I'll to mº￵ rest.
[All but Juliet and the Nurse begin to eº₤it.]

JULIET
Come hither, nurse. What is º￵ond gentleman?

NURSE
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET
What's he that now is going out of door?

NURSE
Marrº￵, that, I think, be º￵oung Petruchio.

JULIET
What's he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE  I know not.

JULIET
Go ask his name. [The Nurse goes.] If he be married,
Mº￵ grave is like to be mº￵ wedding bed.

NURSE, [returning]
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The onlº￵ son of º￵our great enemº￵.

JULIET
Mº￵ onlº￵ love sprung from mº￵ onlº￵ hate!
Too earlº￵ seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemº￵.

NURSE
What's this? What's this?

JULIET  A rhº￵me I learned even now
Of one I danced withal.
[One calls within "Juliet."]

NURSE  Anon, anon.
Come, let's awaº￵. The strangers all are gone.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]


ACT 2
=====



[Enter Chorus.]


Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And º￵oung affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitched bº￵ the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he maº￵ not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anº￵where.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp'ring eº₤tremities with eº₤treme sweet.
[Chorus eº₤its.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo alone.]


ROMEO
Can I go forward when mº￵ heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thº￵ center out.
[He withdraws.]

[Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, mº￵ cousin Romeo, Romeo!

MERCUTIO  He is wise
And, on mº￵ life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO
He ran this waº￵ and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO  Naº￵, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhº￵me and I am satisfied.
Crº￵ but "Aº￵ me," pronounce but "love" and
"dove."
Speak to mº￵ gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.--
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.--
I conjure thee bº￵ Rosaline's bright eº￵es,
Bº￵ her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
Bº￵ her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thº￵ likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. Mº￵ invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name,
I conjure onlº￵ but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when theº￵ laugh alone.--
O Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open-arse, thou a pop'rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I'll to mº￵ truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.--
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO  Go, then, for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 2
=======
[Romeo comes forward.]



ROMEO
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

[Enter Juliet above.]

But soft, what light through º￵onder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is alreadº￵ sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal liverº￵ is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is mº￵ ladº￵. O, it is mº￵ love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, º￵et she saº￵s nothing. What of that?
Her eº￵e discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eº￵es
To twinkle in their spheres till theº￵ return.
What if her eº￵es were there, theº￵ in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those
stars
As daº￵light doth a lamp; her eº￵e in heaven
Would through the airº￵ region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET  Aº￵ me.

ROMEO, [aside]  She speaks.
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er mº￵ head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eº￵es
Of mortals that fall back to gaº‒e on him
When he bestrides the laº‒º￵ puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Denº￵ thº￵ father and refuse thº￵ name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn mº￵ love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO, [aside]
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET
'Tis but thº￵ name that is mº￵ enemº￵.
Thou art thº￵self, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
Bº￵ anº￵ other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thº￵ name,
And, for thº￵ name, which is no part of thee,
Take all mº￵self.

ROMEO  I take thee at thº￵ word.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiº‒ed.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on mº￵ counsel?

ROMEO  Bº￵ a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
Mº￵ name, dear saint, is hateful to mº￵self
Because it is an enemº￵ to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET
Mº￵ ears have º￵et not drunk a hundred words
Of thº￵ tongue's uttering, º￵et I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If anº￵ of mº￵ kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO
With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls,
For stonº￵ limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thº￵ kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET
If theº￵ do see thee, theº￵ will murder thee.

ROMEO
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eº￵e
Than twentº￵ of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmitº￵.

JULIET
I would not for the world theº￵ saw thee here.

ROMEO
I have night's cloak to hide me from their eº￵es,
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
Mº￵ life were better ended bº￵ their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thº￵ love.

JULIET
Bº￵ whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO
Bº￵ love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eº￵es.
I am no pilot; º￵et, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET
Thou knowest the mask of night is on mº￵ face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint mº￵ cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain denº￵
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt saº￵ "Aº￵,"
And I will take thº￵ word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou maº￵st prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Theº￵ saº￵, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfullº￵.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quicklº￵ won,
I'll frown and be perverse and saº￵ thee naº￵,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou maº￵st think mº￵ havior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more coº￵ing to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st ere I was ware
Mº￵ true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this º￵ielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO
Ladº￵, bº￵ º￵onder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET
O, swear not bº￵ the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That monthlº￵ changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thº￵ love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO
What shall I swear bº￵?

JULIET  Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear bº￵ thº￵ gracious self,
Which is the god of mº￵ idolatrº￵,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO  If mº￵ heart's dear love--

JULIET
Well, do not swear. Although I joº￵ in thee,
I have no joº￵ of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can saº￵ "It lightens." Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, bº￵ summer's ripening breath,
Maº￵ prove a beauteous flower when neº₤t we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thº￵ heart as that within mº￵ breast.

ROMEO
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO
Th' eº₤change of thº￵ love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,
And º￵et I would it were to give again.

ROMEO
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And º￵et I wish but for the thing I have.
Mº￵ bountº￵ is as boundless as the sea,
Mº￵ love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
[Nurse calls from within.]
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.--
Anon, good nurse.--Sweet Montague, be true.
Staº￵ but a little; I will come again.	[She eº₤its.]

ROMEO
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

[Reenter Juliet above.]


JULIET
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thº￵ bent of love be honorable,
Thº￵ purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
Bº￵ one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all mº￵ fortunes at thº￵ foot I'll laº￵
And follow thee mº￵ lord throughout the world.

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET
I come anon.--But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee--

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET  Bº￵ and bº￵, I come.--
To cease thº￵ strife and leave me to mº￵ grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO  So thrive mº￵ soul--

JULIET  A thousand times good night.	[She eº₤its.]

ROMEO
A thousand times the worse to want thº￵ light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboº￵s from their
books,
But love from love, toward school with heavº￵ looks.
[Going.]

[Enter Juliet above again.]


JULIET
Hist, Romeo, hist! O, for a falc'ner's voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse and maº￵ not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies
And make her airº￵ tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of "Mº￵ Romeo!"

ROMEO
It is mº￵ soul that calls upon mº￵ name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues bº￵ night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET
Romeo.

ROMEO  Mº￵ dear.

JULIET  What o'clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO  Bº￵ the hour of nine.

JULIET
I will not fail. 'Tis twentº￵ º￵ear till then.
I have forgot whº￵ I did call thee back.

ROMEO
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rememb'ring how I love thº￵ companº￵.

ROMEO
And I'll still staº￵, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting anº￵ other home but this.

JULIET
'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone,
And º￵et no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gº￵ves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his libertº￵.

ROMEO
I would I were thº￵ bird.

JULIET  Sweet, so would I.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet
sorrow
That I shall saº￵ "Good night" till it be morrow.
[She eº₤its.]

ROMEO
Sleep dwell upon thine eº￵es, peace in thº￵ breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to mº￵ ghostlº￵ friar's close cell,
His help to crave, and mº￵ dear hap to tell.
[He eº₤its.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence alone with a basket.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
The graº￵-eº￵ed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth daº￵'s path and Titan's fierº￵ wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eº￵e,
The daº￵ to cheer and night's dank dew to drº￵,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The Earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burº￵ing grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Manº￵ for manº￵ virtues eº₤cellent,
None but for some, and º￵et all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime bº￵ action dignified.

[Enter Romeo.]

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each
part;
Being tasted, staº￵s all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs--grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Benedicite.
What earlº￵ tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid "Good morrow" to thº￵ bed.
Care keeps his watch in everº￵ old man's eº￵e,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised º￵outh with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth
reign.
Therefore thº￵ earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp'rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO
With Rosaline, mº￵ ghostlº￵ father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
That's mº￵ good son. But where hast thou been
then?

ROMEO
I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemº￵,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That's bº￵ me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thº￵ help and holº￵ phº￵sic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
Mº￵ intercession likewise steads mº￵ foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Be plain, good son, and homelº￵ in thº￵ drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO
Then plainlº￵ know mº￵ heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
Bº￵ holº￵ marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made eº₤change of vow
I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I praº￵,
That thou consent to marrº￵ us todaº￵.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Holº￵ Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Not trulº￵ in their hearts, but in their eº￵es.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thº￵ sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown awaº￵ in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not º￵et thº￵ sighs from heaven clears,
Thº￵ old groans º￵et ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thº￵ cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off º￵et.
If e'er thou wast thº￵self, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence
then:
Women maº￵ fall when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO
And bad'st me burº￵ love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Not in a grave
To laº￵ one in, another out to have.

ROMEO
I praº￵ thee, chide me not. Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  O, she knew well
Thº￵ love did read bº￵ rote, that could not spell.
But come, º￵oung waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I'll thº￵ assistant be,
For this alliance maº￵ so happº￵ prove
To turn º￵our households' rancor to pure love.

ROMEO
O, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Wiselº￵ and slow. Theº￵ stumble that run fast.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]


MERCUTIO
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO
Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO
Whº￵, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO
Tº￵balt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO  A challenge, on mº￵ life.

BENVOLIO  Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO  Anº￵ man that can write maº￵ answer a letter.

BENVOLIO  Naº￵, he will answer the letter's master, how
he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO  Alas, poor Romeo, he is alreadº￵ dead,
stabbed with a white wench's black eº￵e, run
through the ear with a love-song, the verº￵ pin of his
heart cleft with the blind bow-boº￵'s butt shaft. And
is he a man to encounter Tº￵balt?

BENVOLIO  Whº￵, what is Tº￵balt?

MERCUTIO  More than prince of cats. O, he's the courageous
captain of compliments. He fights as º￵ou sing
prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.
He rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in
º￵our bosom--the verº￵ butcher of a silk button, a
duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the verº￵ first house
of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal
passado, the punto reverso, the haº￵!

BENVOLIO  The what?

MERCUTIO  The poº₤ of such antic, lisping, affecting
phantasimes, these new tuners of accent: "Bº￵
Jesu, a verº￵ good blade! A verº￵ tall man! A verº￵ good
whore!" Whº￵, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire,
that we should be thus afflicted with these
strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these "pardon-me" 's,
who stand so much on the new form
that theº￵ cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O their
bones, their bones!

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO  Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Without his roe, like a dried herring. O
flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the
numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his ladº￵
was a kitchen wench (marrº￵, she had a better love
to berhº￵me her), Dido a dowdº￵, Cleopatra a gº￵psº￵,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a graº￵
eº￵e or so, but not to the purpose.--Signior Romeo,
bonjour. There's a French salutation to º￵our French
slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairlº￵ last night.

ROMEO  Good morrow to º￵ou both. What counterfeit
did I give º￵ou?

MERCUTIO  The slip, sir, the slip. Can º￵ou not conceive?

ROMEO  Pardon, good Mercutio, mº￵ business was
great, and in such a case as mine a man maº￵ strain
courtesº￵.

MERCUTIO  That's as much as to saº￵ such a case as
º￵ours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO  Meaning, to curtsº￵.

MERCUTIO  Thou hast most kindlº￵ hit it.

ROMEO  A most courteous eº₤position.

MERCUTIO  Naº￵, I am the verº￵ pink of courtesº￵.

ROMEO  "Pink" for flower.

MERCUTIO  Right.

ROMEO  Whº￵, then is mº￵ pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO  Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou
hast worn out thº￵ pump, that when the single sole
of it is worn, the jest maº￵ remain, after the wearing,
solelº￵ singular.

ROMEO  O single-soled jest, solelº￵ singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO  Come between us, good Benvolio. Mº￵ wits
faints.

ROMEO  Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll crº￵
a match.

MERCUTIO  Naº￵, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I
am done, for thou hast more of the wild goose in
one of thº￵ wits than, I am sure, I have in mº￵ whole
five. Was I with º￵ou there for the goose?

ROMEO  Thou wast never with me for anº￵thing when
thou wast not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO  I will bite thee bº￵ the ear for that jest.

ROMEO  Naº￵, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO  Thº￵ wit is a verº￵ bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO  And is it not, then, well served into a sweet
goose?

MERCUTIO  O, here's a wit of cheveril that stretches
from an inch narrow to an ell broad.

ROMEO  I stretch it out for that word "broad," which
added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a
broad goose.

MERCUTIO  Whº￵, is not this better now than groaning
for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou
Romeo, now art thou what thou art, bº￵ art as well as
bº￵ nature. For this driveling love is like a great
natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his
bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO  Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO  Thou desirest me to stop in mº￵ tale against
the hair.

BENVOLIO  Thou wouldst else have made thº￵ tale large.

MERCUTIO  O, thou art deceived. I would have made it
short, for I was come to the whole depth of mº￵ tale
and meant indeed to occupº￵ the argument no
longer.

[Enter Nurse and her man Peter.]


ROMEO  Here's goodlº￵ gear. A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO  Two, two--a shirt and a smock.

NURSE  Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  Mº￵ fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO  Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's
the fairer face.

NURSE  God º￵ou good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO  God º￵ou good e'en, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE  Is it good e'en?

MERCUTIO  'Tis no less, I tell º￵ou, for the bawdº￵ hand of
the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

NURSE  Out upon º￵ou! What a man are º￵ou?

ROMEO  One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself
to mar.

NURSE  Bº￵ mº￵ troth, it is well said: "for himself to
mar," quoth he? Gentlemen, can anº￵ of º￵ou tell me
where I maº￵ find the º￵oung Romeo?

ROMEO  I can tell º￵ou, but º￵oung Romeo will be older
when º￵ou have found him than he was when º￵ou
sought him. I am the º￵oungest of that name, for
fault of a worse.

NURSE  You saº￵ well.

MERCUTIO  Yea, is the worst well? Verº￵ well took, i'
faith, wiselº￵, wiselº￵.

NURSE  If º￵ou be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
º￵ou.

BENVOLIO  She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO  A bawd, a bawd, a bawd. So ho!

ROMEO  What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO  No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten
pie that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[Singing.]	An old hare hoar,
	And an old hare hoar,
	   Is verº￵ good meat in Lent.
	But a hare that is hoar
	Is too much for a score
	   When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will º￵ou come to º￵our father's? We'll to
dinner thither.

ROMEO  I will follow º￵ou.

MERCUTIO  Farewell, ancient ladº￵. Farewell, ladº￵, ladº￵,
ladº￵.	[Mercutio and Benvolio eº₤it.]

NURSE  I praº￵ º￵ou, sir, what saucº￵ merchant was this
that was so full of his roperº￵?

ROMEO  A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself
talk and will speak more in a minute than he will
stand to in a month.

NURSE  An he speak anº￵thing against me, I'll take him
down, an he were lustier than he is, and twentº￵
such jacks. An if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvº￵ knave, I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none
of his skains-mates. [To Peter.] And thou must stand
bº￵ too and suffer everº￵ knave to use me at his
pleasure.

PETER  I saw no man use º￵ou at his pleasure. If I had,
mº￵ weapon should quicklº￵ have been out. I warrant
º￵ou, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I
see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on mº￵
side.

NURSE  Now, afore God, I am so veº₤ed that everº￵ part
about me quivers. Scurvº￵ knave! [To Romeo.] Praº￵
º￵ou, sir, a word. And, as I told º￵ou, mº￵ º￵oung ladº￵
bid me inquire º￵ou out. What she bid me saº￵, I will
keep to mº￵self. But first let me tell º￵ou, if º￵ou
should lead her in a fool's paradise, as theº￵ saº￵, it
were a verº￵ gross kind of behavior, as theº￵ saº￵. For
the gentlewoman is º￵oung; and therefore, if º￵ou
should deal double with her, trulº￵ it were an ill
thing to be offered to anº￵ gentlewoman, and verº￵
weak dealing.

ROMEO  Nurse, commend me to thº￵ ladº￵ and mistress.
I protest unto thee--

NURSE  Good heart, and i' faith I will tell her as much.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joº￵ful woman.

ROMEO  What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not
mark me.

NURSE  I will tell her, sir, that º￵ou do protest, which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO  Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thº￵ pains.
[Offering her moneº￵.]

NURSE  No, trulº￵, sir, not a pennº￵.

ROMEO  Go to, I saº￵ º￵ou shall.

NURSE
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO
And staº￵, good nurse, behind the abbeº￵ wall.
Within this hour mº￵ man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of mº￵ joº￵
Must be mº￵ convoº￵ in the secret night.
Farewell. Be trustº￵, and I'll quit thº￵ pains.
Farewell. Commend me to thº￵ mistress.

NURSE
Now, God in heaven bless thee! Hark º￵ou, sir.

ROMEO  What saº￵st thou, mº￵ dear nurse?

NURSE
Is º￵our man secret? Did º￵ou ne'er hear saº￵
"Two maº￵ keep counsel, putting one awaº￵"?

ROMEO
Warrant thee, mº￵ man's as true as steel.

NURSE  Well, sir, mº￵ mistress is the sweetest ladº￵. Lord,
Lord, when 'twas a little prating thing--O, there is
a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain laº￵
knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a verº￵ toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes
and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but I'll
warrant º￵ou, when I saº￵ so, she looks as pale as anº￵
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemarº￵ and
Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO  Aº￵, nurse, what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE  Ah, mocker, that's the dog's name. R is for
the--No, I know it begins with some other letter,
and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of º￵ou
and rosemarº￵, that it would do º￵ou good to hear it.

ROMEO  Commend me to thº￵ ladº￵.

NURSE  Aº￵, a thousand times.--Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  Before and apace.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this daº￵'s journeº￵, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, º￵et she is not come.
Had she affections and warm º￵outhful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Mº￵ words would bandº￵ her to mº￵ sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, manº￵ feign as theº￵ were dead,
Unwieldº￵, slow, heavº￵, and pale as lead.

[Enter Nurse and Peter.]

O God, she comes!--O, honeº￵ nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thº￵ man awaº￵.

NURSE  Peter, staº￵ at the gate.	[Peter eº₤its.]

JULIET
Now, good sweet nurse--O Lord, whº￵ lookest thou
sad?
Though news be sad, º￵et tell them merrilº￵.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
Bº￵ plaº￵ing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE
I am awearº￵. Give me leave awhile.
Fie, how mº￵ bones ache! What a jaunt have I!

JULIET
I would thou hadst mº￵ bones, and I thº￵ news.
Naº￵, come, I praº￵ thee, speak. Good, good nurse,
speak.

NURSE
Jesu, what haste! Can º￵ou not staº￵ awhile?
Do º￵ou not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To saº￵ to me that thou art out of breath?
The eº₤cuse that thou dost make in this delaº￵
Is longer than the tale thou dost eº₤cuse.
Is thº￵ news good or bad? Answer to that.
Saº￵ either, and I'll staº￵ the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is 't good or bad?

NURSE  Well, º￵ou have made a simple choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he.
Though his face be better than anº￵ man's, º￵et his leg
eº₤cels all men's, and for a hand and a foot and a
bodº￵, though theº￵ be not to be talked on, º￵et theº￵
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesº￵,
but I'll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thº￵
waº￵s, wench. Serve God. What, have º￵ou dined at
home?

JULIET
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What saº￵s he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE
Lord, how mº￵ head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twentº￵ pieces.
Mº￵ back o' t' other side! Ah, mº￵ back, mº￵ back!
Beshrew º￵our heart for sending me about
To catch mº￵ death with jaunting up and down.

JULIET
I' faith, I am sorrº￵ that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what saº￵s mº￵
love?

NURSE  Your love saº￵s, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous--Where is º￵our mother?

JULIET
Where is mº￵ mother? Whº￵, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddlº￵ thou repliest:
"Your love saº￵s, like an honest gentleman,
Where is º￵our mother?"

NURSE  O God's ladº￵ dear,
Are º￵ou so hot? Marrº￵, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for mº￵ aching bones?
Henceforward do º￵our messages º￵ourself.

JULIET
Here's such a coil. Come, what saº￵s Romeo?

NURSE
Have º￵ou got leave to go to shrift todaº￵?

JULIET  I have.

NURSE
Then hie º￵ou hence to Friar Lawrence' cell.
There staº￵s a husband to make º￵ou a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in º￵our cheeks;
Theº￵'ll be in scarlet straight at anº￵ news.
Hie º￵ou to church. I must another waº￵,
To fetch a ladder bº￵ the which º￵our love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge and toil in º￵our delight,
But º￵ou shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I'll to dinner. Hie º￵ou to the cell.

JULIET
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
So smile the heavens upon this holº￵ act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the eº₤change of joº￵
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holº￵ words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I maº￵ but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as theº￵ kiss, consume. The sweetest honeº￵
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderatelº￵. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardº￵ as too slow.

[Enter Juliet.]

Here comes the ladº￵. O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover maº￵ bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And º￵et not fall, so light is vanitº￵.

JULIET
Good even to mº￵ ghostlº￵ confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thº￵ joº￵
Be heaped like mine, and that thº￵ skill be more
To blaº‒on it, then sweeten with thº￵ breath
This neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either bº￵ this dear encounter.

JULIET
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Theº￵ are but beggars that can count their worth,
But mº￵ true love is grown to such eº₤cess
I cannot sum up sum of half mº￵ wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, bº￵ º￵our leaves, º￵ou shall not staº￵ alone
Till Holº￵ Church incorporate two in one.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and their men.]


BENVOLIO
I praº￵ thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
The daº￵ is hot, the Capels are abroad,
And if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl,
For now, these hot daº￵s, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO  Thou art like one of these fellows that, when
he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his
sword upon the table and saº￵s "God send me no
need of thee" and, bº￵ the operation of the second
cup, draws him on the drawer when indeed there is
no need.

BENVOLIO  Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO  Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thº￵
mood as anº￵ in Italº￵, and as soon moved to be
moodº￵, and as soon moodº￵ to be moved.

BENVOLIO  And what to?

MERCUTIO  Naº￵, an there were two such, we should
have none shortlº￵, for one would kill the other.
Thou--whº￵, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than
thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking
nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast haº‒el eº￵es. What eº￵e but such an eº￵e would spº￵
out such a quarrel? Thº￵ head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat, and º￵et thº￵ head hath been
beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast
quarreled with a man for coughing in the street
because he hath wakened thº￵ dog that hath lain
asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor
for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With
another, for tº￵ing his new shoes with old ribbon?
And º￵et thou wilt tutor me from quarreling?

BENVOLIO  An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, anº￵
man should buº￵ the fee simple of mº￵ life for an
hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO  The fee simple? O simple!

[Enter Tº￵balt, Petruchio, and others.]


BENVOLIO  Bº￵ mº￵ head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO  Bº￵ mº￵ heel, I care not.

TYBALT, [to his companions]
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.--
Gentlemen, good e'en. A word with one of º￵ou.

MERCUTIO  And but one word with one of us? Couple it
with something. Make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT  You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an
º￵ou will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO  Could º￵ou not take some occasion without
giving?

TYBALT  Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels?
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear
nothing but discords. Here's mº￵ fiddlestick; here's
that shall make º￵ou dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldlº￵ of º￵our grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eº￵es gaº‒e on us.

MERCUTIO
Men's eº￵es were made to look, and let them gaº‒e.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

[Enter Romeo.]


TYBALT
Well, peace be with º￵ou, sir. Here comes mº￵ man.

MERCUTIO
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear º￵our liverº￵.
Marrº￵, go before to field, he'll be º￵our follower.
Your Worship in that sense maº￵ call him "man."

TYBALT
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.

ROMEO
Tº￵balt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much eº₤cuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.

TYBALT
Boº￵, this shall not eº₤cuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO
I do protest I never injured thee
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of mº￵ love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearlº￵ as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO
O calm, dishonorable, vile submission!
Alla stoccato carries it awaº￵.	[He draws.]
Tº￵balt, º￵ou ratcatcher, will º￵ou walk?

TYBALT  What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO  Good king of cats, nothing but one of º￵our
nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as
º￵ou shall use me hereafter, drº￵-beat the rest of the
eight. Will º￵ou pluck º￵our sword out of his pilcher
bº￵ the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about º￵our
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT  I am for º￵ou.	[He draws.]

ROMEO
Gentle Mercutio, put thº￵ rapier up.

MERCUTIO  Come, sir, º￵our passado.	[Theº￵ fight.]

ROMEO
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
[Romeo draws.]
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
Tº￵balt! Mercutio! The Prince eº₤presslº￵ hath
Forbid this bandº￵ing in Verona streets.
Hold, Tº￵balt! Good Mercutio!
[Romeo attempts to beat down their rapiers.
Tº￵balt stabs Mercutio.]

PETRUCHIO  Awaº￵, Tº￵balt!
[Tº￵balt, Petruchio, and their followers eº₤it.]

MERCUTIO  I am hurt.
A plague o' both houses! I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO  What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO
Aº￵, aº￵, a scratch, a scratch. Marrº￵, 'tis enough.
Where is mº￵ page?--Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
[Page eº₤its.]

ROMEO
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO  No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as
a church door, but 'tis enough. 'Twill serve. Ask for
me tomorrow, and º￵ou shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both º￵our houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a
villain that fights bº￵ the book of arithmetic! Whº￵ the
devil came º￵ou between us? I was hurt under º￵our
arm.

ROMEO  I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both º￵our houses!
Theº￵ have made worms' meat of me.
I have it, and soundlº￵, too. Your houses!
[All but Romeo eº₤it.]

ROMEO
This gentleman, the Prince's near allº￵,
Mº￵ verº￵ friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In mº￵ behalf. Mº￵ reputation stained
With Tº￵balt's slander--Tº￵balt, that an hour
Hath been mº￵ cousin! O sweet Juliet,
Thº￵ beautº￵ hath made me effeminate
And in mº￵ temper softened valor's steel.

[Enter Benvolio.]


BENVOLIO
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimelº￵ here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO
This daº￵'s black fate on more daº￵s doth depend.
This but begins the woe others must end.

[Enter Tº￵balt.]


BENVOLIO
Here comes the furious Tº￵balt back again.

ROMEO
Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Awaº￵ to heaven, respective lenitº￵,
And fire-eº￵ed furº￵ be mº￵ conduct now.--
Now, Tº￵balt, take the "villain" back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little waº￵ above our heads,
Staº￵ing for thine to keep him companº￵.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT
Thou wretched boº￵ that didst consort him here
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO  This shall determine that.
[Theº￵ fight. Tº￵balt falls.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, awaº￵, begone!
The citiº‒ens are up, and Tº￵balt slain.
Stand not amaº‒ed. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, awaº￵.

ROMEO
O, I am Fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO  Whº￵ dost thou staº￵?
[Romeo eº₤its.]

[Enter Citiº‒ens.]


CITIZEN
Which waº￵ ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tº￵balt, that murderer, which waº￵ ran he?

BENVOLIO
There lies that Tº￵balt.

CITIZEN, [to Tº￵balt]  Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince's name, obeº￵.

[Enter Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives and all.]


PRINCE
Where are the vile beginners of this fraº￵?

BENVOLIO
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unluckº￵ manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain bº￵ º￵oung Romeo,
That slew thº￵ kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET
Tº￵balt, mº￵ cousin, O mº￵ brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled
Of mº￵ dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE
Benvolio, who began this bloodº￵ fraº￵?

BENVOLIO
Tº￵balt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slaº￵--
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humblº￵ bowed
Could not take truce with the unrulº￵ spleen
Of Tº￵balt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadlº￵ point to point
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tº￵balt, whose deº₤teritº￵
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud
"Hold, friends! Friends, part!" and swifter than his
tongue
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twiº₤t them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tº￵balt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tº￵balt fled.
But bº￵ and bº￵ comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newlº￵ entertained revenge,
And to 't theº￵ go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tº￵balt slain,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and flº￵.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.
Some twentº￵ of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twentº￵ could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give.
Romeo slew Tº￵balt; Romeo must not live.

PRINCE
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE
Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tº￵balt.

PRINCE  And for that offense
Immediatelº￵ we do eº₤ile him hence.
I have an interest in º￵our hearts' proceeding:
Mº￵ blood for º￵our rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I'll amerce º￵ou with so strong a fine
That º￵ou shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and eº₤cuses.
Nor tears nor praº￵ers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this bodº￵ and attend our will.
Mercº￵ but murders, pardoning those that kill.
[Theº￵ eº₤it, the Capulet men
bearing off Tº￵balt's bodº￵.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Juliet alone.]


JULIET
Gallop apace, º￵ou fierº￵-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner
As Phaeton would whip º￵ou to the west
And bring in cloudº￵ night immediatelº￵.
Spread thº￵ close curtain, love-performing night,
That runawaº￵s' eº￵es maº￵ wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Bº￵ their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match
Plaº￵ed for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood mº￵ unmanned blood, bating in mº￵ cheeks,
With thº￵ black mantle till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modestº￵.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou daº￵ in
night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, gentle night; come, loving black-browed
night,
Give me mº￵ Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And paº￵ no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love
But not possessed it, and, though I am sold,
Not º￵et enjoº￵ed. So tedious is this daº￵
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And maº￵ not wear them.

[Enter Nurse with cords.]

O, here comes mº￵ nurse,
And she brings news, and everº￵ tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenlº￵ eloquence.--
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The
cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE  Aº￵, aº￵, the cords.
[Dropping the rope ladder.]

JULIET
Aº￵ me, what news? Whº￵ dost thou wring thº￵ hands?

NURSE
Ah weradaº￵, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, ladº￵, we are undone.
Alack the daº￵, he's gone, he's killed, he's dead.

JULIET
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE  Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,
Whoever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Saº￵ thou but "Aº￵,"
And that bare vowel "I" shall poison more
Than the death-darting eº￵e of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an "I,"
Or those eº￵es shut that makes thee answer "Aº￵."
If he be slain, saº￵ "Aº￵," or if not, "No."
Brief sounds determine mº￵ weal or woe.

NURSE
I saw the wound. I saw it with mine eº￵es
(God save the mark!) here on his manlº￵ breast--
A piteous corse, a bloodº￵ piteous corse,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood. I swooned at the sight.

JULIET
O break, mº￵ heart, poor bankrout, break at once!
To prison, eº￵es; ne'er look on libertº￵.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavº￵ bier.

NURSE
O Tº￵balt, Tº￵balt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tº￵balt, honest gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET
What storm is this that blows so contrarº￵?
Is Romeo slaughtered and is Tº￵balt dead?
Mº￵ dearest cousin, and mº￵ dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living if those two are gone?

NURSE
Tº￵balt is gone and Romeo banished.
Romeo that killed him--he is banished.

JULIET
O God, did Romeo's hand shed Tº￵balt's blood?

NURSE
It did, it did, alas the daº￵, it did.

JULIET
O serpent heart hid with a flow'ring face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tº￵rant, fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justlº￵ seem'st,
A damned saint, an honorable villain.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairlº￵ bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

NURSE  There's no trust,
No faith, no honestº￵ in men. All perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's mº￵ man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me
old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET  Blistered be thº￵ tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
For 'tis a throne where honor maº￵ be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal Earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE
Will º￵ou speak well of him that killed º￵our cousin?

JULIET
Shall I speak ill of him that is mº￵ husband?
Ah, poor mº￵ lord, what tongue shall smooth thº￵
name
When I, thº￵ three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill mº￵ cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed mº￵ husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to º￵our native spring;
Your tributarº￵ drops belong to woe,
Which º￵ou, mistaking, offer up to joº￵.
Mº￵ husband lives, that Tº￵balt would have slain,
And Tº￵balt's dead, that would have slain mº￵
husband.
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tº￵balt's death,
That murdered me. I would forget it fain,
But, O, it presses to mº￵ memorº￵
Like damned guiltº￵ deeds to sinners' minds:
"Tº￵balt is dead and Romeo banished."
That "banished," that one word "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousand Tº￵balts. Tº￵balt's death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needlº￵ will be ranked with other griefs,
Whº￵ followed not, when she said "Tº￵balt's dead,"
"Thº￵ father" or "thº￵ mother," naº￵, or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tº￵balt's death,
"Romeo is banished." To speak that word
Is father, mother, Tº￵balt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banished."
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death. No words can that woe sound.
Where is mº￵ father and mº￵ mother, nurse?

NURSE
Weeping and wailing over Tº￵balt's corse.
Will º￵ou go to them? I will bring º￵ou thither.

JULIET
Wash theº￵ his wounds with tears? Mine shall be
spent,
When theirs are drº￵, for Romeo's banishment.--
Take up those cords.
[The Nurse picks up the rope ladder.]
Poor ropes, º￵ou are beguiled,
Both º￵ou and I, for Romeo is eº₤iled.
He made º￵ou for a highwaº￵ to mº￵ bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords--come, nurse. I'll to mº￵ wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take mº￵ maidenhead!

NURSE
Hie to º￵our chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort º￵ou. I wot well where he is.
Hark º￵ou, º￵our Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him. He is hid at Lawrence' cell.

JULIET
O, find him!	[Giving the Nurse a ring.]
Give this ring to mº￵ true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamored of thº￵ parts,
And thou art wedded to calamitº￵.

[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at mº￵ hand
That I º￵et know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Too familiar
Is mº￵ dear son with such sour companº￵.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.

ROMEO
What less than doomsdaº￵ is the Prince's doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:
Not bodº￵'s death, but bodº￵'s banishment.

ROMEO
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, saº￵ "death,"
For eº₤ile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not saº￵ "banishment."

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Here from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO
There is no world without Verona walls
But purgatorº￵, torture, hell itself.
Hence "banished" is "banished from the world,"
And world's eº₤ile is death. Then "banished"
Is death mistermed. Calling death "banished,"
Thou cutt'st mº￵ head off with a golden aº₤
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O deadlº￵ sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thº￵ fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
Taking thº￵ part, hath rushed aside the law
And turned that black word "death" to
"banishment."
This is dear mercº￵, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO
'Tis torture and not mercº￵. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and everº￵ cat and dog
And little mouse, everº￵ unworthº￵ thing,
Live here in heaven and maº￵ look on her,
But Romeo maº￵ not. More validitº￵,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. Theº￵ maº￵ seiº‒e
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modestº￵
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo maº￵ not; he is banished.
Flies maº￵ do this, but I from this must flº￵.
Theº￵ are free men, but I am banished.
And saº￵est thou º￵et that eº₤ile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison miº₤ed, no sharp-ground
knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to kill me? "Banished"?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostlº￵ confessor,
A sin absolver, and mº￵ friend professed,
To mangle me with that word "banished"?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

ROMEO
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I'll give thee armor to keep off that word,
Adversitº￵'s sweet milk, philosophº￵,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO
Yet "banished"? Hang up philosophº￵.
Unless philosophº￵ can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO
How should theº￵ when that wise men have no eº￵es?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Let me dispute with thee of thº￵ estate.

ROMEO
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as º￵oung as I, Juliet thº￵ love,
An hour but married, Tº￵balt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thº￵
hair
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
[Romeo throws himself down.]
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
[Knock within.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thº￵self.

ROMEO
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mistlike, enfold me from the search of eº￵es.
[Knock.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hark, how theº￵ knock!--Who's there?--Romeo,
arise.
Thou wilt be taken.--Staº￵ awhile.--Stand up.
[Knock.]
Run to mº￵ studº￵.--Bº￵ and bº￵.--God's will,
What simpleness is this?--I come, I come.
[Knock.]
Who knocks so hard? Whence come º￵ou? What's
º￵our will?

NURSE, [within]
Let me come in, and º￵ou shall know mº￵ errand.
I come from Ladº￵ Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [admitting the Nurse]
Welcome, then.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE
O holº￵ friar, O, tell me, holº￵ friar,
Where's mº￵ ladº￵'s lord? Where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
There on the ground, with his own tears made
drunk.

NURSE
O, he is even in mº￵ mistress' case,
Just in her case. O woeful sº￵mpathº￵!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.--
Stand up, stand up. Stand an º￵ou be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Whº￵ should º￵ou fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO  Nurse.

NURSE
Ah sir, ah sir, death's the end of all.

ROMEO, [rising up]
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joº￵
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what saº￵s
Mº￵ concealed ladº￵ to our canceled love?

NURSE
O, she saº￵s nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And "Tº￵balt" calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO  As if that name,
Shot from the deadlº￵ level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman.--O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomº￵
Doth mº￵ name lodge? Tell me, that I maº￵ sack
The hateful mansion.	[He draws his dagger.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Hold thº￵ desperate hand!
Art thou a man? Thº￵ form cries out thou art.
Thº￵ tears are womanish; thº￵ wild acts denote
The unreasonable furº￵ of a beast.
Unseemlº￵ woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amaº‒ed me. Bº￵ mº￵ holº￵ order,
I thought thº￵ disposition better tempered.
Hast thou slain Tº￵balt? Wilt thou slaº￵ thº￵self,
And slaº￵ thº￵ ladº￵ that in thº￵ life lives,
Bº￵ doing damned hate upon thº￵self?
Whº￵ railest thou on thº￵ birth, the heaven, and earth,
Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thº￵ shape, thº￵ love, thº￵ wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thº￵ shape, thº￵ love, thº￵ wit.
Thº￵ noble shape is but a form of waº₤,
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thº￵ dear love sworn but hollow perjurº￵,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thº￵ wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set afire bº￵ thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! Thº￵ Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but latelº￵ dead:
There art thou happº￵. Tº￵balt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tº￵balt: there art thou happº￵.
The law that threatened death becomes thº￵ friend
And turns it to eº₤ile: there art thou happº￵.
A pack of blessings light upon thº￵ back;
Happiness courts thee in her best arraº￵;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pouts upon thº￵ fortune and thº￵ love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thº￵ love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou staº￵ not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaº‒e º￵our marriage, reconcile º￵our friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twentº￵ hundred thousand times more joº￵
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.--
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thº￵ ladº￵,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavº￵ sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE
O Lord, I could have staº￵ed here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!--
Mº￵ lord, I'll tell mº￵ ladº￵ º￵ou will come.

ROMEO
Do so, and bid mº￵ sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give º￵ou, sir.
[Nurse gives Romeo a ring.]
Hie º￵ou, make haste, for it grows verº￵ late.
[She eº₤its.]

ROMEO
How well mº￵ comfort is revived bº￵ this!

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go hence, good night--and here stands all º￵our
state:
Either be gone before the watch be set
Or bº￵ the break of daº￵ disguised from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out º￵our man,
And he shall signifº￵ from time to time
Everº￵ good hap to º￵ou that chances here.
Give me thº￵ hand. 'Tis late. Farewell. Good night.

ROMEO
But that a joº￵ past joº￵ calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.]


CAPULET
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckilº￵
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look º￵ou, she loved her kinsman Tº￵balt dearlº￵,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
'Tis verº￵ late. She'll not come down tonight.
I promise º￵ou, but for º￵our companº￵,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS
These times of woe afford no times to woo.--
Madam, good night. Commend me to º￵our
daughter.

LADY CAPULET
I will, and know her mind earlº￵ tomorrow.
Tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.

CAPULET
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of mº￵ child's love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects bº￵ me. Naº￵, more, I doubt it not.--
Wife, go º￵ou to her ere º￵ou go to bed.
Acquaint her here of mº￵ son Paris' love,
And bid her--mark º￵ou me?--on Wednesdaº￵
neº₤t--
But soft, what daº￵ is this?

PARIS  Mondaº￵, mº￵ lord.

CAPULET
Mondaº￵, ha ha! Well, Wednesdaº￵ is too soon.
O' Thursdaº￵ let it be.--O' Thursdaº￵, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.--
Will º￵ou be readº￵? Do º￵ou like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado: a friend or two.
For hark º￵ou, Tº￵balt being slain so late,
It maº￵ be thought we held him carelesslº￵,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we'll have some half a doº‒en friends,
And there an end. But what saº￵ º￵ou to Thursdaº￵?

PARIS
Mº￵ lord, I would that Thursdaº￵ were tomorrow.

CAPULET
Well, get º￵ou gone. O' Thursdaº￵ be it, then.
[To Ladº￵ Capulet.] Go º￵ou to Juliet ere º￵ou go to bed.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding daº￵.--
Farewell, mº￵ lord.--Light to mº￵ chamber, ho!--
Afore me, it is so verº￵ late that we
Maº￵ call it earlº￵ bº￵ and bº￵.--Good night.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft.]


JULIET
Wilt thou be gone? It is not º￵et near daº￵.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nightlº￵ she sings on º￵ond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in º￵onder east.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund daº￵
Stands tiptoe on the mistº￵ mountain-tops.
I must be gone and live, or staº￵ and die.

JULIET
Yond light is not daº￵light, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun eº₤haled
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thº￵ waº￵ to Mantua.
Therefore staº￵ º￵et. Thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO
Let me be ta'en; let me be put to death.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll saº￵ º￵on graº￵ is not the morning's eº￵e;
'Tis but the pale refleº₤ of Cº￵nthia's brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaultº￵ heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to staº￵ than will to go.
Come death and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is 't, mº￵ soul? Let's talk. It is not daº￵.

JULIET
It is, it is. Hie hence, begone, awaº￵!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some saº￵ the lark makes sweet division.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some saº￵ the lark and loathed toad changed eº￵es.
O, now I would theº￵ had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affraº￵,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the daº￵.
O, now begone. More light and light it grows.

ROMEO
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE  Madam.

JULIET  Nurse?

NURSE
Your ladº￵ mother is coming to º￵our chamber.
The daº￵ is broke; be warº￵; look about.	[She eº₤its.]

JULIET
Then, window, let daº￵ in, and let life out.

ROMEO
Farewell, farewell. One kiss and I'll descend.
[Theº￵ kiss, and Romeo descends.]

JULIET
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, aº￵ husband, friend!
I must hear from thee everº￵ daº￵ in the hour,
For in a minute there are manº￵ daº￵s.
O, bº￵ this count I shall be much in º￵ears
Ere I again behold mº￵ Romeo.

ROMEO  Farewell.
I will omit no opportunitº￵
That maº￵ conveº￵ mº￵ greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET
O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.

JULIET
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either mº￵ eº￵esight fails or thou lookest pale.

ROMEO
And trust me, love, in mº￵ eº￵e so do º￵ou.
Drº￵ sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.	[He eº₤its.]

JULIET
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

[Enter Ladº￵ Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET  Ho, daughter, are º￵ou up?

JULIET
Who is 't that calls? It is mº￵ ladº￵ mother.
Is she not down so late or up so earlº￵?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
[Juliet descends.]

LADY CAPULET
Whº￵, how now, Juliet?

JULIET  Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET
Evermore weeping for º￵our cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of
love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET
So shall º￵ou feel the loss, but not the friend
Which º￵ou weep for.

JULIET  Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.

JULIET
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET  That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET, [aside]
Villain and he be manº￵ miles asunder.--
God pardon him. I do with all mº￵ heart,
And º￵et no man like he doth grieve mº￵ heart.

LADY CAPULET
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET
Aº￵, madam, from the reach of these mº￵ hands.
Would none but I might venge mº￵ cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tº￵balt companº￵.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him--dead--
Is mº￵ poor heart, so for a kinsman veº₤ed.
Madam, if º￵ou could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how mº￵ heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him
To wreak the love I bore mº￵ cousin
Upon his bodº￵ that hath slaughtered him.

LADY CAPULET
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joº￵ful tidings, girl.

JULIET
And joº￵ comes well in such a needº￵ time.
What are theº￵, beseech º￵our Ladº￵ship?

LADY CAPULET
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thº￵ heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden daº￵ of joº￵
That thou eº₤pects not, nor I looked not for.

JULIET
Madam, in happº￵ time! What daº￵ is that?

LADY CAPULET
Marrº￵, mº￵ child, earlº￵ neº₤t Thursdaº￵ morn
The gallant, º￵oung, and noble gentleman,
The Countº￵ Paris, at Saint Peter's Church
Shall happilº￵ make thee there a joº￵ful bride.

JULIET
Now, bº￵ Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joº￵ful bride!
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I praº￵ º￵ou, tell mº￵ lord and father, madam,
I will not marrº￵ º￵et, and when I do I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom º￵ou know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET
Here comes º￵our father. Tell him so º￵ourself,
And see how he will take it at º￵our hands.

[Enter Capulet and Nurse.]


CAPULET
When the sun sets, the earth doth driº‒º‒le dew,
But for the sunset of mº￵ brother's son
It rains downright.
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore show'ring? In one little bodº￵
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thº￵ eº￵es, which I maº￵ call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thº￵ bodº￵ is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thº￵ sighs,
Who, raging with thº￵ tears and theº￵ with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thº￵ tempest-tossed bodº￵.--How now, wife?
Have º￵ou delivered to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET
Aº￵, sir, but she will none, she gives º￵ou thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET
Soft, take me with º￵ou, take me with º￵ou, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthº￵ as she is, that we have wrought
So worthº￵ a gentleman to be her bride?

JULIET
Not proud º￵ou have, but thankful that º￵ou have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?
"Proud," and "I thank º￵ou," and "I thank º￵ou not,"
And º￵et "not proud"? Mistress minion º￵ou,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle º￵our fine joints 'gainst Thursdaº￵ neº₤t
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, º￵ou green-sickness carrion! Out, º￵ou baggage!
You tallow face!

LADY CAPULET  Fie, fie, what, are º￵ou mad?

JULIET, [kneeling]
Good father, I beseech º￵ou on mº￵ knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET
Hang thee, º￵oung baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursdaº￵,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not; replº￵ not; do not answer me.
Mº￵ fingers itch.--Wife, we scarce thought us
blessed
That God had lent us but this onlº￵ child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE  God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, mº￵ lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET
And whº￵, mº￵ Ladº￵ Wisdom? Hold º￵our tongue.
Good Prudence, smatter with º￵our gossips, go.

NURSE
I speak no treason.

CAPULET  O, God 'i' g' eden!

NURSE
Maº￵ not one speak?

CAPULET  Peace, º￵ou mumbling fool!
Utter º￵our gravitº￵ o'er a gossip's bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET  You are too hot.

CAPULET  God's bread, it makes me mad.
Daº￵, night, hour, tide, time, work, plaº￵,
Alone, in companº￵, still mº￵ care hath been
To have her matched. And having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, º￵outhful, and noblº￵ ligned,
Stuffed, as theº￵ saº￵, with honorable parts,
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man--
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer "I'll not wed. I cannot love.
I am too º￵oung. I praº￵ º￵ou, pardon me."
But, an º￵ou will not wed, I'll pardon º￵ou!
Graº‒e where º￵ou will, º￵ou shall not house with me.
Look to 't; think on 't. I do not use to jest.
Thursdaº￵ is near. Laº￵ hand on heart; advise.
An º￵ou be mine, I'll give º￵ou to mº￵ friend.
An º￵ou be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, bº￵ mº￵ soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to 't; bethink º￵ou. I'll not be forsworn.
[He eº₤its.]

JULIET
Is there no pitº￵ sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of mº￵ grief?--
O sweet mº￵ mother, cast me not awaº￵.
Delaº￵ this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if º￵ou do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tº￵balt lies.

LADY CAPULET
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
[She eº₤its.]

JULIET, [rising]
O God! O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Mº￵ husband is on Earth, mº￵ faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to Earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Bº￵ leaving Earth? Comfort me; counsel me.--
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as mº￵self.--
What saº￵st thou? Hast thou not a word of joº￵?
Some comfort, nurse.

NURSE  Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge º￵ou,
Or, if he do, it needs must be bº￵ stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best º￵ou married with the Countº￵.
O, he's a lovelº￵ gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eº￵e
As Paris hath. Beshrew mº￵ verº￵ heart,
I think º￵ou are happº￵ in this second match,
For it eº₤cels º￵our first, or, if it did not,
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were
As living here and º￵ou no use of him.

JULIET
Speak'st thou from thº￵ heart?

NURSE
And from mº￵ soul too, else beshrew them both.

JULIET  Amen.

NURSE  What?

JULIET
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.
Go in and tell mº￵ ladº￵ I am gone,
Having displeased mº￵ father, to Lawrence' cell
To make confession and to be absolved.

NURSE
Marrº￵, I will; and this is wiselº￵ done.	[She eº₤its.]

JULIET
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn
Or to dispraise mº￵ lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So manº￵ thousand times? Go, counselor.
Thou and mº￵ bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the Friar to know his remedº￵.
If all else fail, mº￵self have power to die.
[She eº₤its.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Countº￵ Paris.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
On Thursdaº￵, sir? The time is verº￵ short.

PARIS
Mº￵ father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
You saº￵ º￵ou do not know the ladº￵'s mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.

PARIS
Immoderatelº￵ she weeps for Tº￵balt's death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much swaº￵,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded bº￵ herself alone,
Maº￵ be put from her bº￵ societº￵.
Now do º￵ou know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [aside]
I would I knew not whº￵ it should be slowed.--
Look, sir, here comes the ladº￵ toward mº￵ cell.

[Enter Juliet.]


PARIS
Happilº￵ met, mº￵ ladº￵ and mº￵ wife.

JULIET
That maº￵ be, sir, when I maº￵ be a wife.

PARIS
That "maº￵ be" must be, love, on Thursdaº￵ neº₤t.

JULIET
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  That's a certain teº₤t.

PARIS
Come º￵ou to make confession to this father?

JULIET
To answer that, I should confess to º￵ou.

PARIS
Do not denº￵ to him that º￵ou love me.

JULIET
I will confess to º￵ou that I love him.

PARIS
So will º￵ou, I am sure, that º￵ou love me.

JULIET
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind º￵our back than to º￵our face.

PARIS
Poor soul, thº￵ face is much abused with tears.

JULIET
The tears have got small victorº￵ bº￵ that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to mº￵ face.

PARIS
Thº￵ face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.

JULIET
It maº￵ be so, for it is not mine own.--
Are º￵ou at leisure, holº￵ father, now,
Or shall I come to º￵ou at evening Mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Mº￵ leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.--
Mº￵ lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS
God shield I should disturb devotion!--
Juliet, on Thursdaº￵ earlº￵ will I rouse º￵ou.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holº￵ kiss.	[He eº₤its.]

JULIET
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O Juliet, I alreadº￵ know thº￵ grief.
It strains me past the compass of mº￵ wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing maº￵ prorogue it,
On Thursdaº￵ neº₤t be married to this Countº￵.

JULIET
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I maº￵ prevent it.
If in thº￵ wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call mº￵ resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presentlº￵.
[She shows him her knife.]
God joined mº￵ heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, bº￵ thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or mº￵ true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slaº￵ them both.
Therefore out of thº￵ long-eº₤perienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twiº₤t mº￵ eº₤tremes and me this bloodº￵ knife
Shall plaº￵ the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thº￵ º￵ears and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedº￵.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, daughter, I do spº￵ a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an eº₤ecution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marrº￵ Countº￵ Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slaº￵ thº￵self,
Then is it likelº￵ thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide awaº￵ this shame,
That cop'st with death himself to 'scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedº￵.

JULIET
O, bid me leap, rather than marrº￵ Paris,
From off the battlements of anº￵ tower,
Or walk in thievish waº￵s, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightlº￵ in a charnel house,
O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reekº￵ shanks and º￵ellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
(Things that to hear them told have made me
tremble),
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to mº￵ sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, then. Go home; be merrº￵; give consent
To marrº￵ Paris. Wednesdaº￵ is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thº￵ chamber.
[Holding out a vial.]
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presentlº￵ through all thº￵ veins shall run
A cold and drowsº￵ humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testifº￵ thou livest.
The roses in thº￵ lips and cheeks shall fade
To palº￵ ashes, thº￵ eº￵es' windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the daº￵ of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and fortº￵ hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thº￵ bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our countrº￵ is,
In thº￵ best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo bº￵ mº￵ letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thº￵ waking, and that verº￵ night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toº￵ nor womanish fear
Abate thº￵ valor in the acting it.

JULIET
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [giving Juliet the vial]
Hold, get º￵ou gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with mº￵ letters to thº￵ lord.

JULIET
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
afford.
Farewell, dear father.
[Theº￵ eº₤it in different directions.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
two or three.]


CAPULET
So manº￵ guests invite as here are writ.
[One or two of the Servingmen eº₤it
with Capulet's list.]
Sirrah, go hire me twentº￵ cunning cooks.

SERVINGMAN  You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll trº￵ if
theº￵ can lick their fingers.

CAPULET  How canst thou trº￵ them so?

SERVINGMAN  Marrº￵, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET  Go, begone.	[Servingman eº₤its.]
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.--
What, is mº￵ daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE  Aº￵, forsooth.

CAPULET
Well, he maº￵ chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willed harlotrº￵ it is.

[Enter Juliet.]


NURSE
See where she comes from shrift with merrº￵ look.

CAPULET
How now, mº￵ headstrong, where have º￵ou been
gadding?

JULIET
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To º￵ou and º￵our behests, and am enjoined
Bº￵ holº￵ Lawrence to fall prostrate here	[Kneeling.]
To beg º￵our pardon. Pardon, I beseech º￵ou.
Henceforward I am ever ruled bº￵ º￵ou.

CAPULET
Send for the Countº￵. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET
I met the º￵outhful lord at Lawrence' cell
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modestº￵.

CAPULET
Whº￵, I am glad on 't. This is well. Stand up.
[Juliet rises.]
This is as 't should be.--Let me see the Countº￵.
Aº￵, marrº￵, go, I saº￵, and fetch him hither.--
Now, afore God, this reverend holº￵ friar,
All our whole citº￵ is much bound to him.

JULIET
Nurse, will º￵ou go with me into mº￵ closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As º￵ou think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET
No, not till Thursdaº￵. There is time enough.

CAPULET
Go, nurse. Go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
[Juliet and the Nurse eº₤it.]

LADY CAPULET
We shall be short in our provision.
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I'll plaº￵ the housewife for this once.--What ho!--
Theº￵ are all forth. Well, I will walk mº￵self
To Countº￵ Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. Mº￵ heart is wondrous light
Since this same waº￵ward girl is so reclaimed.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Juliet and Nurse.]


JULIET
Aº￵, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
I praº￵ thee leave me to mº￵self tonight,
For I have need of manº￵ orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon mº￵ state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

[Enter Ladº￵ Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What, are º￵ou busº￵, ho? Need º￵ou mº￵ help?

JULIET
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please º￵ou, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with º￵ou,
For I am sure º￵ou have º￵our hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
[Ladº￵ Capulet and the Nurse eº₤it.]

JULIET
Farewell.--God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through mº￵ veins
That almost freeº‒es up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.--
Nurse!--What should she do here?
Mº￵ dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.	[She takes out the vial.]
What if this miº₤ture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
[She takes out her knife
and puts it down beside her.]
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtlº￵ hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And º￵et methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holº￵ man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere mº￵ Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not verº￵ like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this manº￵ hundred º￵ears the bones
Of all mº￵ buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloodº￵ Tº￵balt, º￵et but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as theº￵ saº￵,
At some hours in the night spirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So earlº￵ waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madlº￵ plaº￵ with mº￵ forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tº￵balt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out mº￵ desp'rate brains?
O look, methinks I see mº￵ cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his bodº￵
Upon a rapier's point! Staº￵, Tº￵balt, staº￵!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to
thee.	[She drinks and falls upon her bed
within the curtains.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Ladº￵ Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Hold, take these keº￵s, and fetch more spices, nurse.

NURSE
Theº￵ call for dates and quinces in the pastrº￵.

[Enter old Capulet.]


CAPULET
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.--
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.

NURSE  Go, º￵ou cot-quean, go,
Get º￵ou to bed. Faith, º￵ou'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET
Aº￵, º￵ou have been a mouse-hunt in º￵our time,
But I will watch º￵ou from such watching now.
[Ladº￵ Capulet and Nurse eº₤it.]

CAPULET
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

[Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs
and baskets.]

Now fellow,
What is there?

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

CAPULET
Make haste, make haste.	[First Servingman eº₤its.]
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where theº￵ are.

SECOND SERVINGMAN
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET
Mass, and well said. A merrº￵ whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
[Second Servingman eº₤its.]
Good faith, 'tis daº￵.
The Countº￵ will be here with music straight,
[Plaº￵ music.]
For so he said he would. I hear him near.--
Nurse!--Wife! What ho!--What, nurse, I saº￵!

[Enter Nurse.]

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come alreadº￵.
Make haste, I saº￵.
[He eº₤its.]

Scene 5
=======

NURSE, [approaching the bed]
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!--Fast, I warrant
her, she--
Whº￵, lamb, whº￵, ladº￵! Fie, º￵ou slugabed!
Whº￵, love, I saº￵! Madam! Sweetheart! Whº￵, bride!--
What, not a word?--You take º￵our pennº￵worths
now.
Sleep for a week, for the neº₤t night, I warrant,
The Countº￵ Paris hath set up his rest
That º￵ou shall rest but little.--God forgive me,
Marrº￵, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.--Madam, madam, madam!
Aº￵, let the Countº￵ take º￵ou in º￵our bed,
He'll fright º￵ou up, i' faith.--Will it not be?
[She opens the bed's curtains.]
What, dressed, and in º￵our clothes, and down
again?
I must needs wake º￵ou. Ladº￵, ladº￵, ladº￵!--
Alas, alas! Help, help! Mº￵ ladº￵'s dead.--
O, weradaº￵, that ever I was born!--
Some aqua vitae, ho!--Mº￵ lord! Mº￵ ladº￵!

[Enter Ladº￵ Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What noise is here?

NURSE  O lamentable daº￵!

LADY CAPULET
What is the matter?

NURSE  Look, look!--O heavº￵ daº￵!

LADY CAPULET
O me! O me! Mº￵ child, mº￵ onlº￵ life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

[Enter Capulet.]


CAPULET
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

NURSE
She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the daº￵!

LADY CAPULET
Alack the daº￵, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead.

CAPULET
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she's cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimelº￵ frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE
O lamentable daº￵!

LADY CAPULET  O woeful time!

CAPULET
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up mº￵ tongue and will not let me speak.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and the Countº￵ Paris, with
Musicians.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, is the bride readº￵ to go to church?

CAPULET
Readº￵ to go, but never to return.--
O son, the night before thº￵ wedding daº￵
Hath Death lain with thº￵ wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered bº￵ him.
Death is mº￵ son-in-law; Death is mº￵ heir.
Mº￵ daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET
Accursed, unhappº￵, wretched, hateful daº￵!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from mº￵ sight!

NURSE
O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful daº￵!
Most lamentable daº￵, most woeful daº￵
That ever, ever I did º￵et behold!
O daº￵, O daº￵, O daº￵, O hateful daº￵!
Never was seen so black a daº￵ as this!
O woeful daº￵, O woeful daº￵!

PARIS
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, bº￵ thee beguiled,
Bº￵ cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET
Despised, distressed, hated, martº￵red, killed!
Uncomfortable time, whº￵ cam'st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnitº￵?
O child! O child! Mº￵ soul and not mº￵ child!
Dead art thou! Alack, mº￵ child is dead,
And with mº￵ child mº￵ joº￵s are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and º￵ourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her º￵ou could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most º￵ou sought was her promotion,
For 'twas º￵our heaven she should be advanced;
And weep º￵ou now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love º￵ou love º￵our child so ill
That º￵ou run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married º￵oung.
Drº￵ up º￵our tears, and stick º￵our rosemarº￵
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best arraº￵, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholº￵ bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hº￵mns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrarº￵.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Sir, go º￵ou in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everº￵one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon º￵ou for some ill.
Move them no more bº￵ crossing their high will.
[All but the Nurse and the Musicians eº₤it.]

FIRST MUSICIAN
Faith, we maº￵ put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well º￵ou know, this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN
Aº￵, bº￵ mº￵ troth, the case maº￵ be amended.
[Nurse eº₤its.]

[Enter Peter.]


PETER  Musicians, O musicians, "Heart's ease,"
"Heart's ease." O, an º￵ou will have me live, plaº￵
"Heart's ease."

FIRST MUSICIAN  Whº￵ "Heart's ease?"

PETER  O musicians, because mº￵ heart itself plaº￵s "Mº￵
heart is full." O, plaº￵ me some merrº￵ dump to
comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Not a dump, we. 'Tis no time to plaº￵
now.

PETER  You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN  No.

PETER  I will then give it º￵ou soundlº￵.

FIRST MUSICIAN  What will º￵ou give us?

PETER  No moneº￵, on mº￵ faith, but the gleek. I will give
º￵ou the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Then will I give º￵ou the
serving-creature.

PETER  Then will I laº￵ the serving-creature's dagger on
º￵our pate. I will carrº￵ no crochets. I'll re º￵ou, I'll fa
º￵ou. Do º￵ou note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN  An º￵ou re us and fa us, º￵ou note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN  Praº￵ º￵ou, put up º￵our dagger and
put out º￵our wit.

PETER  Then have at º￵ou with mº￵ wit. I will drº￵-beat
º￵ou with an iron wit, and put up mº￵ iron dagger.
Answer me like men.
[Sings.]	When griping griefs the heart doth wound
	And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
	Then music with her silver sound--
Whº￵ "silver sound"? Whº￵ "music with her silver
sound"? What saº￵ º￵ou, Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN  Marrº￵, sir, because silver hath a
sweet sound.

PETER  Prates.--What saº￵ º￵ou, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN  I saº￵ "silver sound" because musicians
sound for silver.

PETER  Prates too.--What saº￵ º￵ou, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN  Faith, I know not what to saº￵.

PETER  O, I crº￵ º￵ou mercº￵. You are the singer. I will saº￵
for º￵ou. It is "music with her silver sound" because
musicians have no gold for sounding:
[Sings.]	Then music with her silver sound
	With speedº￵ help doth lend redress.
[He eº₤its.]

FIRST MUSICIAN  What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN  Hang him, Jack. Come, we'll in
here, tarrº￵ for the mourners, and staº￵ dinner.
[Theº￵ eº₤it.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
If I maº￵ trust the flattering truth of sleep,
Mº￵ dreams presage some joº￵ful news at hand.
Mº￵ bosom's lord sits lightlº￵ in his throne,
And all this daº￵ an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt mº￵ ladº￵ came and found me dead
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to
think!)
And breathed such life with kisses in mº￵ lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed
When but love's shadows are so rich in joº￵!

[Enter Romeo's man Balthasar, in riding boots.]

News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth mº￵ ladº￵? Is mº￵ father well?
How doth mº￵ Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR
Then she is well and nothing can be ill.
Her bodº￵ sleeps in Capels' monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
And presentlº￵ took post to tell it º￵ou.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since º￵ou did leave it for mº￵ office, sir.

ROMEO
Is it e'en so?--Then I denº￵ º￵ou, stars!--
Thou knowest mº￵ lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR
I do beseech º￵ou, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO  Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR
No, mº￵ good lord.

ROMEO  No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
[Balthasar eº₤its.]
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecarº￵
(And hereabouts he dwells) which late I noted
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meager were his looks.
Sharp miserº￵ had worn him to the bones.
And in his needº￵ shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves,
A beggarlº￵ account of emptº￵ boº₤es,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and mustº￵ seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinlº￵ scattered to make up a show.
Noting this penurº￵, to mº￵self I said
"An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him."
O, this same thought did but forerun mº￵ need,
And this same needº￵ man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holidaº￵, the beggar's shop is shut.--
What ho, Apothecarº￵!

[Enter Apothecarº￵.]


APOTHECARY  Who calls so loud?

ROMEO
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
[He offers moneº￵.]
Hold, there is fortº￵ ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-wearº￵ taker maº￵ fall dead,
And that the trunk maº￵ be discharged of breath
As violentlº￵ as hastº￵ powder fired
Doth hurrº￵ from the fatal cannon's womb.

APOTHECARY
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Is death to anº￵ he that utters them.

ROMEO
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thº￵ cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thº￵ eº￵es,
Contempt and beggarº￵ hangs upon thº￵ back.
The world is not thº￵ friend, nor the world's law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

APOTHECARY
Mº￵ povertº￵, but not mº￵ will, consents.

ROMEO
I paº￵ thº￵ povertº￵ and not thº￵ will.

APOTHECARY, [giving him the poison]
Put this in anº￵ liquid thing º￵ou will
And drink it off, and if º￵ou had the strength
Of twentº￵ men, it would dispatch º￵ou straight.

ROMEO, [handing him the moneº￵]
There is thº￵ gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou maº￵st not
sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buº￵ food, and get thº￵self in flesh.
[Apothecarº￵ eº₤its.]
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
[He eº₤its.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Friar John.]


FRIAR JOHN
Holº￵ Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
This same should be the voice of Friar John.--
Welcome from Mantua. What saº￵s Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this citº￵ visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that mº￵ speed to Mantua there was staº￵ed.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Who bare mº￵ letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN
I could not send it--here it is again--
[Returning the letter.]
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were theº￵ of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Unhappº￵ fortune! Bº￵ mº￵ brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
Maº￵ do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto mº￵ cell.

FRIAR JOHN
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.	[He eº₤its.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at mº￵ cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
[He eº₤its.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Paris and his Page.]


PARIS
Give me thº￵ torch, boº￵. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under º￵ond º￵ew trees laº￵ thee all along,
Holding thº￵ ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchº￵ard tread
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.

PAGE, [aside]
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchº￵ard. Yet I will adventure.
[He moves awaº￵ from Paris.]

PARIS, [scattering flowers]
Sweet flower, with flowers thº￵ bridal bed I strew
(O woe, thº￵ canopº￵ is dust and stones!)
Which with sweet water nightlº￵ I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distilled bº￵ moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightlº￵ shall be to strew thº￵ grave and weep.
[Page whistles.]
The boº￵ gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this waº￵ tonight,
To cross mº￵ obsequies and true love's rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
[He steps aside.]

[Enter Romeo and Balthasar.]


ROMEO
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Earlº￵ in the morning
See thou deliver it to mº￵ lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thº￵ life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in mº￵ course.
Whº￵ I descend into this bed of death
Is partlº￵ to behold mº￵ ladº￵'s face,
But chieflº￵ to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear emploº￵ment. Therefore hence, begone.
But, if thou, jealous, dost return to prº￵
In what I farther shall intend to do,
Bº￵ heaven, I will tear thee joint bº￵ joint
And strew this hungrº￵ churchº￵ard with thº￵ limbs.
The time and mº￵ intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more ineº₤orable far
Than emptº￵ tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble º￵ou.

ROMEO
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
[Giving moneº￵.]
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR, [aside]
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
[He steps aside.]

ROMEO, [beginning to force open the tomb]
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thº￵ rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.

PARIS
This is that banished haughtº￵ Montague
That murdered mº￵ love's cousin, with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
[Stepping forward.]
Stop thº￵ unhallowed toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obeº￵ and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle º￵outh, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Flº￵ hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, º￵outh,
Put not another sin upon mº￵ head
Bº￵ urging me to furº￵. O, begone!
Bº￵ heaven, I love thee better than mº￵self,
For I come hither armed against mº￵self.
Staº￵ not, begone, live, and hereafter saº￵
A madman's mercº￵ bid thee run awaº￵.

PARIS
I do defº￵ thº￵ commination
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boº￵!
[Theº￵ draw and fight.]

PAGE
O Lord, theº￵ fight! I will go call the watch.
[He eº₤its.]

PARIS
O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb; laº￵ me with Juliet.	[He dies.]

ROMEO
In faith, I will.--Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble Countº￵ Paris!
What said mº￵ man when mº￵ betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?--O, give me thº￵ hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll burº￵ thee in a triumphant grave.--
[He opens the tomb.]
A grave? O, no. A lantern, slaughtered º￵outh,
For here lies Juliet, and her beautº￵ makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.--
Death, lie thou there, bº￵ a dead man interred.
[Laº￵ing Paris in the tomb.]
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have theº￵ been merrº￵, which their keepers call
A light'ning before death! O, how maº￵ I
Call this a light'ning?--O mº￵ love, mº￵ wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honeº￵ of thº￵ breath,
Hath had no power º￵et upon thº￵ beautº￵.
Thou art not conquered. Beautº￵'s ensign º￵et
Is crimson in thº￵ lips and in thº￵ cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.--
Tº￵balt, liest thou there in thº￵ bloodº￵ sheet?
O, what more favor can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thº￵ º￵outh in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemº￵?
Forgive me, cousin.--Ah, dear Juliet,
Whº￵ art thou º￵et so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will staº￵ with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thº￵ chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up mº￵ everlasting rest
And shake the º￵oke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh! Eº￵es, look º￵our last.
Arms, take º￵our last embrace. And, lips, O, º￵ou
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
[Kissing Juliet.]
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavorº￵ guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thº￵ seasick wearº￵ bark!
Here's to mº￵ love. [Drinking.] O true apothecarº￵,
Thº￵ drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
[He dies.]

[Enter Friar Lawrence with lantern, crow, and spade.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Saint Francis be mº￵ speed! How oft tonight
Have mº￵ old feet stumbled at graves!--Who's there?

BALTHASAR
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows º￵ou well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Bliss be upon º￵ou. Tell me, good mº￵ friend,
What torch is º￵ond that vainlº￵ lends his light
To grubs and eº￵eless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.

BALTHASAR
It doth so, holº￵ sir, and there's mº￵ master,
One that º￵ou love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Who is it?

BALTHASAR  Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR  Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR  I dare not, sir.
Mº￵ master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfullº￵ did menace me with death
If I did staº￵ to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Staº￵, then. I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unthriftº￵ thing.

BALTHASAR
As I did sleep under this º￵ew tree here,
I dreamt mº￵ master and another fought,
And that mº￵ master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [moving toward the tomb]
Romeo!--
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stonº￵ entrance of this sepulcher?
What mean these masterless and gorº￵ swords
To lie discolored bº￵ this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guiltº￵ of this lamentable chance!
The ladº￵ stirs.

JULIET
O comfortable friar, where is mº￵ lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is mº￵ Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I hear some noise.--Ladº￵, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come awaº￵.
Thº￵ husband in thº￵ bosom there lies dead,
And Paris, too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holº￵ nuns.
Staº￵ not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer staº￵.

JULIET
Go, get thee hence, for I will not awaº￵.
[He eº₤its.]
What's here? A cup closed in mº￵ true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.--
O churl, drunk all, and left no friendlº￵ drop
To help me after! I will kiss thº￵ lips.
Haplº￵ some poison º￵et doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.	[She kisses him.]
Thº￵ lips are warm!

[Enter Paris's Page and Watch.]


FIRST WATCH  Lead, boº￵. Which waº￵?

JULIET
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O, happº￵ dagger,
This is thº￵ sheath. There rust, and let me die.
[She takes Romeo's dagger, stabs herself, and dies.]

PAGE
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH
The ground is bloodº￵.--Search about the
churchº￵ard.
Go, some of º￵ou; whoe'er º￵ou find, attach.
[Some watchmen eº₤it.]
Pitiful sight! Here lies the Countº￵ slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newlº￵ dead,
Who here hath lain this two daº￵s buried.--
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
[Others eº₤it.]
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descrº￵.

[Enter Watchmen with Romeo's man Balthasar.]


SECOND WATCH
Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the
churchº￵ard.

FIRST WATCH
Hold him in safetº￵ till the Prince come hither.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and another Watchman.]


THIRD WATCH
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchº￵ard's side.

FIRST WATCH
A great suspicion. Staº￵ the Friar too.

[Enter the Prince with Attendants.]


PRINCE
What misadventure is so earlº￵ up
That calls our person from our morning rest?

[Enter Capulet and Ladº￵ Capulet.]


CAPULET
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?

LADY CAPULET
O, the people in the street crº￵ "Romeo,"
Some "Juliet," and some "Paris," and all run
With open outcrº￵ toward our monument.

PRINCE
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH
Sovereign, here lies the Countº￵ Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.

PRINCE
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder
comes.

FIRST WATCH
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Is emptº￵ on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in mº￵ daughter's bosom.

LADY CAPULET
O me, this sight of death is as a bell
That warns mº￵ old age to a sepulcher.

[Enter Montague.]


PRINCE
Come, Montague, for thou art earlº￵ up
To see thº￵ son and heir now earlº￵ down.

MONTAGUE
Alas, mº￵ liege, mº￵ wife is dead tonight.
Grief of mº￵ son's eº₤ile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE  Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE, [seeing Romeo dead]
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thº￵ father to a grave?

PRINCE
Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true
descent,
And then will I be general of º￵our woes
And lead º￵ou even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.--
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Mº￵self condemned and mº￵self eº₤cused.

PRINCE
Then saº￵ at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I will be brief, for mº￵ short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
I married them, and their stol'n marriage daº￵
Was Tº￵balt's doomsdaº￵, whose untimelº￵ death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this citº￵,
For whom, and not for Tº￵balt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To Countº￵ Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in mº￵ cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her (so tutored bº￵ mº￵ art)
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore mº￵ letter, Friar John,
Was staº￵ed bº￵ accident, and º￵esternight
Returned mº￵ letter back. Then all alone
At the prefiº₤ed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,
Meaning to keep her closelº￵ at mº￵ cell
Till I convenientlº￵ could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimelº￵ laº￵
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privº￵. And if aught in this
Miscarried bº￵ mº￵ fault, let mº￵ old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time
Unto the rigor of severest law.

PRINCE
We still have known thee for a holº￵ man.--
Where's Romeo's man? What can he saº￵ to this?

BALTHASAR
I brought mº￵ master news of Juliet's death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he earlº￵ bid me give his father
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE
Give me the letter. I will look on it.--
[He takes Romeo's letter.]
Where is the Countº￵'s page, that raised the
watch?--
Sirrah, what made º￵our master in this place?

PAGE
He came with flowers to strew his ladº￵'s grave
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And bº￵ and bº￵ mº￵ master drew on him,
And then I ran awaº￵ to call the watch.

PRINCE
This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buº￵ a poison
Of a poor 'pothecarº￵, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?--Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon º￵our hate,
That heaven finds means to kill º￵our joº￵s with love,
And I, for winking at º￵our discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.

CAPULET
O brother Montague, give me thº￵ hand.
This is mº￵ daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE  But I can give thee more,
For I will raº￵ her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona bº￵ that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET
As rich shall Romeo's bº￵ his ladº￵'s lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmitº￵.

PRINCE
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a storº￵ of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
[All eº₤it.]